Specify one Helper & compute two VDAF rounds per DAP aggregation step. (#393)
ietf-wg-ppm/draft-ietf-ppm-dap: draft-ietf-ppm-dap.md

Helper:
: An Aggregator that executes the aggregation and collection sub-protocols as
  instructed by the Leader.

Input share:
: An Aggregator's share of a measurement. The input shares are output by the
  VDAF sharding algorithm. As defined in {{!VDAF}}.

Output share:
: An Aggregator's share of the prepared measurement resulting from successful
  execution of the VDAF preparation phase. Many output shares are combined into
  an aggregate share during the VDAF aggregation phase. As defined in
  {{!VDAF}}.

Leader:

> : An Aggregator that coordinates aggregation and collection with the Helper.

Reviewer: There is one Leader
```suggestion
: The Aggregator that coordinates aggregation and collection with the Helper.
```

  requirements are described in {{verification-key}}.

Finally, the Collector is configured with the HPKE secret key corresponding to

> `collector_config`.

Reviewer: FWIW I wish this were called "collector_hkpe_config" ("collector_config" is a bit vague)

Author: I don't remember why I made this change, and no disagreement here that `collector_hpke_config` is easier to understand. I switched back.

struct {
  ReportMetadata report_metadata;
  opaque public_share<0..2^32-1>;
  HpkeCiphertext leader_encrypted_input_share;

>   HpkeCiphertext helper_encrypted_input_share;

Reviewer 2: It was a while ago, but [we actually both asked Bran to do this](https://github.com/ietf-wg-ppm/draft-ietf-ppm-dap/pull/393#discussion_r1144102260). I think we should keep this change in this PR. Plus, if you're concerned about the code changes needed to test this against Janus, well, the message format changes are already implemented [there](https://github.com/divviup/janus/pull/1234), so backing this out would be more code changes for us!

>   HpkeCiphertext helper_encrypted_input_share;

Reviewer: ACK, no problem.

with error `reportTooEarly`. In this situation, the Client MAY re-upload the
report later on.

> If the Leader's input share contains an unrecognized extension, or if two

Reviewer: This should say "report share" instead of "input share". The latter is the thing consumed by VDAF; the former is the thing consumed by DAP. We need to make this distinction clear, somehow, and use terminology consistently. (Here and below.)

Reviewer: Actually it looks like there are multiple places where this regression happened.

Author: I think that's incorrect: this section has no concept of report shares (which are not introduced until the aggregation sections), and indeed now report shares are gone entirely (as the `ReportShare` message was merged into the new `PrepareInit` message, since that was the only usage of the `ReportShare` message). Specifically, the message that would contain the extensions referred to in this text is called `PlaintextInputShare`.

IMO, if we want to change terminology, we should do so in a later PR that updates all usages of "input share" in this section; but for now, this textual change is a simple bugfix.

Reviewer 2: Extensions occur in `struct PlaintextInputShare` (a DAP-level concept), so this is more accurate than `ReportShare.

Reviewer: From the glossary section:
```
Report:
: A cryptographically protected measurement uploaded to the Leader by a Client.
  Comprised of a set of report shares.

Report Share:
: An encrypted input share comprising a piece of a report.
```

Reviewer: Conceptually a "report share" is everything an Aggregator needs in order to aggregate its share of the Client's input. Semantically this ought to include the report extensions.

Author: FWIW, it seems that there is some terminology confusion/disagreement around the difference between an "input share" and a "report share"; I suggest we discuss outside this PR, come to consensus, and fix things up throughout the spec in a later PR.

Reviewer 2: I agree. Any ambiguity between input and report shares existed before this change so we shouldn't try to solve that problem here.

Reviewer: Agreed, let's make sure we get some clarity on this. But does it make sense to at least revert the change of replacing "ReportShare" to "input share" in this PR?

| Leader |                                         | Helper |
+--------+                                         +--------+
   | AggregationJobInitReq:                              |

>    |   agg_param, prep_step(init, report_share)          |

Reviewer: The Leader no longer sends prep step.

   |<----------------------------------------------------|
   | AggregationJobContinueReq:                          |
   |   prep_step(continue)                               |
   |---------------------------------------------------->|
   |                                 AggregationJobResp: |
   |                               prep_step(continue)   |
   |<----------------------------------------------------|
   |                                                     |
  ...                                                   ...
   |                                                     |
   | AggregationJobContinueReq:                          |
   |   prep_step(continue)                               |
   |---------------------------------------------------->|
   |                                 AggregationJobResp: |
   |                      prep_step(continue|finished)   |
   |<----------------------------------------------------|
   |                                                     |
   v                                                     v
  leader_out_share                         helper_out_share
~~~
{: #agg-flow title="Overview of the DAP aggregation sub-protocol."}

> 

Reviewer: I believe we we'll want to find some way to convey the information in this paragraph. I agree that it now needs to be rewritten now that the term "prep step" is going away.

Author: I restored most of this, I think defining the possible preparation response types is not useful (as it is defined as part of the message type).

                             agg_param,
                             report_id,
                             public_share,
                             plaintext_input_share.payload)
if state != Rejected():
  (state, outbound) = VDAF.ping_pong_req(agg_param, state, None)
~~~

where:

* `vdaf_verify_key` is the VDAF verification key for the task
* `agg_param` is the VDAF aggregation parameter provided by the Collector (see
  {{collect-flow}})
* `report_id` is the report ID, used as the nonce for VDAF sharding
* `public_share` is the report's public share
* `plaintext_input_share` is the Leader's `PlaintextInputShare`

The methods are defined in {{!VDAF}}. This process determines the initial
per-report `state`, as well as the initial `outbound` message to send to the
Helper. (These are coalesced into a single HTTP request to the Helper as
described below.) If `state == Rejected()`, then the report is rejected and
removed from the set of candidate reports.

[[OPEN ISSUE #470: update references to the ping-pong API, once a VDAF draft is
published which describes it.]]

Next, for each candidate report the Leader constructs a `PrepareInit` message
structured as follows:

~~~

> struct ReportShare {

Reviewer 2: This should be `struct { ... } ReportShare;` instead of `struct ReportShare { ... };` (GitHub won't let me make a suggestion to that effect or I would save you the trouble).

Author: d'oh, thanks :)

The aggregation flow can be thought of as having three phases:

- Initialization: Begin the aggregation flow by disseminating report shares and
  initializing the VDAF prep state for each report.
- Continuation: Continue the aggregation flow by exchanging prep shares and
  messages until preparation completes or an error occurs.
- Completion: Finish the aggregate flow, yielding an output share corresponding
  to each report report share in the batch.

These phases are described in the following subsections.

The number of DAP rounds required to complete aggregation is determined by the
underlying VDAF: completing aggregation requires `ceil((ROUNDS + 1) / 2)` round
trips, where `ROUNDS` is the VDAF parameter of the same name. The reasoning for

> this is described in {{agg-number-of-rounds}}.

Reviewer: Suggestion: Now that this explained in {{!VDDAF}} I think we skip this here.

~~~
enum {
  continue(0),
  finished(1)
  reject(2),
  (255)
} PrepareStepState;

struct {
  ReportId report_id;
  PrepareStepState prepare_step_state;
  select (PrepareStep.prepare_step_state) {
    case continue: opaque payload<0..2^32-1>;

>     case reject:   ReportShareError report_share_error;

Author: RFC 8446 presentation language omits cases which have no message, see e.g. https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8446#appendix-B.3.

>     case reject:   ReportShareError report_share_error;

Author: I made things consistent in the other direction, by removing "empty" cases.

>     case reject:   ReportShareError report_share_error;

Reviewer: SGTM. Can you please add a note to the commit message this, as well as a reference to the text in RFC 8446? The reason is that @wangshan previously added the "Empty" bit, and since we're reverting that change we need to at least document why it's valid.

  };
} PartialBatchSelector;

struct {

>   ReportMetadata metadata;
>   opaque public_share<0..2^32-1>;
>   opaque leader_prep_share<0..2^32-1>;
>   HpkeCiphertext encrypted_input_share;

Reviewer: * I think the notion of "report share" remains useful even after this change. I think it would be useful to keep the struct around.
* I'd have to double check, but are we bumping the length tag for the prep share from 16 to 32 bits in this change? 16 ought to be sufficient.

```suggestion
  ReportShare report_share;
  opaque leader_prep_share<0..2^32-1>;
```

Reviewer: > Hmm -- ReportShare was replaced (renamed & modified) with ReportAggregationInitReq, for consistency with ReportAggregation{Init,Continue}{Req,Resp} naming.

This PR is quite large; to minimize reviewer effort, can we try to limit it to essential changes only?

Reviewer: In particular, in general I think we should try to avoid renaming structures, even if their contents change. In this particular case I don't think we need change the meaning (or even the contents of) ReportShare. The report share can still just be the encrypte dinput share and meta data; then the prep share could be a separate structure.

opaque AggregationJobID[16];
~~~

The leader can run this process for many sets of candidate reports in parallel
as needed. After choosing a set of candidates, the leader begins aggregation by
The Leader can run this process for many sets of candidate reports in parallel
as needed. After choosing a set of candidates, the Leader begins aggregation by
splitting each report into report shares, one for each Aggregator. The Leader
and Helpers then run the aggregate initialization flow to accomplish two tasks:
and Helper then run the aggregate initialization flow to accomplish two tasks:

> 1. Recover and determine which input report shares are invalid.

Reviewer: Nice :)

    case finished:
      ReportId report_id;
    case reject:
      ReportId report_id;
      ReportShareError report_share_error;
  };
} PrepareStep;
~~~

### Aggregate Initialization {#agg-init}

The Leader begins an aggregation job by choosing a set of candidate reports that
pertain to the same DAP task and a unique job ID. The job ID is a 16-byte value,
structured as follows:

~~~
opaque AggregationJobID[16];
~~~

The Leader can run this process for many sets of candidate reports in parallel
as needed. After choosing a set of candidates, the Leader begins aggregation by
splitting each report into report shares, one for each Aggregator. The Leader
and Helper then run the aggregate initialization flow to accomplish two tasks:

1. Recover and determine which input report shares are valid.
1. For each valid report share, initialize the VDAF preparation process (see
   {{Section 5.2 of !VDAF}}).

The Leader and Helper initialization behavior is detailed below.

#### Leader Initialization {#leader-init}

The Leader begins the aggregate initialization phase with the set of candidate
reports as follows:

1. Generate a fresh AggregationJobID. The ID value MUST be unique within the

>    scope of the corresponding DAP task.

Reviewer 2: This requirement that the aggregation job ID be unique in the scope of the task seems correct, but doesn't quite align with what is said at the top of `{{agg-init}}`, which just says "unique", and I think that can only be read as "globally unique".

Anyway, the requirements for aggregation job ID should only be stated once, either here or at the top of `{{agg-init}}`.

Reviewer 2: Bump, the inconsistent uniqueness requirements are still there at dcced627426a8db038b99c1c9918fe97de93299e

Author: Looking to https://github.com/ietf-wg-ppm/draft-ietf-ppm-dap/commit/dcced627426a8db038b99c1c9918fe97de93299e, `agg-init` now says "The Leader begins an aggregation job by choosing a set of candidate reports that
pertain to the same DAP task and a job ID which MUST be unique within the scope
of the task." while `leader-init` now only says "Generate a fresh AggregationJobID."

Reviewer 2: Oops, never mind, I was holding it wrong.

1. Decrypt the input share for each report share as described in
   {{input-share-decryption}}.
1. Check that the resulting input share is valid as described in
   {{input-share-validation}}.

If any step invalidates the report, the Leader rejects the report and removes
it from the set of candidate reports.

Next, for each report the Leader executes the following procedure:

~~~
state = VDAF.ping_pong_start(vdaf_verify_key,
                             True,
                             agg_param,
                             report_id,
                             public_share,
                             plaintext_input_share.payload)
if state != Rejected():
  (state, outbound) = VDAF.ping_pong_req(agg_param, state, None)
~~~

where:

* `vdaf_verify_key` is the VDAF verification key for the task
* `agg_param` is the VDAF aggregation parameter provided by the Collector (see
  {{collect-flow}})

> * `report_id` is the report ID

Reviewer 2: nit: I think we should clarify that the report ID is used as the nonce.

Reviewer 2: Bump, still no mention of the VDAF nonce in this section at dcced627426a8db038b99c1c9918fe97de93299e

Author: Looking to https://github.com/ietf-wg-ppm/draft-ietf-ppm-dap/commit/dcced627426a8db038b99c1c9918fe97de93299e, the relevant text now says: "`report_id` is the report ID, used as a nonce"

Reviewer 2: Oops, never mind, I was holding it wrong.

* `public_share` is the report's public share
* `plaintext_input_share` is the Leader's `PlaintextInputShare`

The methods are defined in {{!VDAF}}. This process determines the initial
per-report `state`, as well as the initial `outbound` message to send to the
Helper. (These are coalesced into a single HTTP request to the Helper as
described below.) If `state == Rejected()`, then the report is rejected and
removed from the set of candidate reports.

[[OPEN ISSUE: update references to the ping-pong API, once a VDAF draft is
published which describes it.]]

Next, for each candidate report the Leader constructs a `PrepareStep` message
of type "initialize":

~~~
struct {

>   PrepareStepState prepare_step_state = 0; /* initialize */

Reviewer 2: I like this notation, too, but since we refer to RFC 8446 section 3, I think we would need to explain that this document's usage of that presentation language differs in this one respect. I think the paragraph just before `{{overview}}` where we introduce the presentation language:

>This document uses the presentation language of {{!RFC8446}} to define messages
>in the DAP protocol. Encoding and decoding of these messages as byte strings
>also follows {{RFC8446}}.

would be a good place to add some text explaining our object literal notation.

>   PrepareStepState prepare_step_state = 0; /* initialize */

Reviewer: This notation is borrowed from [Section 7.2](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8446#section-7.1). I don't believe it's formalized anywhere.

Meta comment here: Let's not let perfection be the enemy of the good. We have a lot of work to do on the spec, and a this stage the most important thing is that it's unambiguous. If adding some text to clarify this notation would help, then go for it.

>   PrepareStepState prepare_step_state = 0; /* initialize */

Reviewer: Both are valid I think. I'm fine with this change, but I'd err on the side of being consistent with the VDAF spec. There I'm not sure we want to change this since the pseudocode is Python and this would look slightly less Pythonic.

>   PrepareStepState prepare_step_state = 0; /* initialize */

Reviewer 2: I agree with Chris that this notation is good and we should use it. I scanned a handful of other documents in the TLS WG looking for prior art on this and couldn't find anything. I think our best path forward will be to add a paragraph or two to DAP explaining this notation. I wrote up https://github.com/ietf-wg-ppm/draft-ietf-ppm-dap/issues/472 for us to clarify this notation.

>   PrepareStepState prepare_step_state = 0; /* initialize */

Reviewer 2: You're going to quite correctly accuse me of being a pedant, but this particular snippet is not a Python description of calling a VDAF method but rather TLS presentation language explaining how to construct a wire message. If we look at [an example from RFC 8446](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8446#appendix-B.1):

```
enum {
          invalid(0),
          change_cipher_spec(20),
          alert(21),
          handshake(22),
          application_data(23),
          heartbeat(24),  /* [RFC 6520](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6520) */
          (255)
      } ContentType;

      <snip>

      struct {
          ContentType opaque_type = application_data; /* 23 */
          ProtocolVersion legacy_record_version = 0x0303; /* TLS v1.2 */
          uint16 length;
          opaque encrypted_record[TLSCiphertext.length];
      } TLSCiphertext;
```

>   PrepareStepState prepare_step_state = 0; /* initialize */

Reviewer 2: We'll have to revisit this in https://github.com/ietf-wg-ppm/draft-ietf-ppm-dap/issues/472 anyway, so @branlwyd I think you should make the call on whether you want to update these in this PR. It's perfectly readable either way.

>   PrepareStepState prepare_step_state = 0; /* initialize */

Author: I like specifying the name, I don't think it's any less clear (and implementors will probably be writing a name rather than a number) & it's supported by existing notation.

>   PrepareStepState prepare_step_state = 0; /* initialize */

Reviewer: @tgeoghegan I'm not sure what you mean? In VDAF we currently write:
```python
﻿﻿﻿    elif inbound.type == 1: # continue
```
If we instead wrote something like
```python
    elif inbound.type == continue:
```
then we'd need to define `continue` as a constant somewhere. Which, you know, we could do.

>   PrepareStepState prepare_step_state = 0; /* initialize */

Reviewer 2: The snippet that we're discussing in this thread is:

```
~~~
struct {
  PrepareStepState prepare_step_state = 0; /* initialize */
  ReportShare report_share = helper_report_share;
  opaque payload<0..2^32-1> = outbound;
} PrepareStep;
~~~
```

That's not Python, it's RFC 8446 presentation language, so Python syntax is irrelevant here.

   {{Section 5.2 of !VDAF}}).

The Leader and Helper initialization behavior is detailed below.

#### Leader Initialization {#leader-init}

The Leader begins the aggregate initialization phase with the set of candidate
reports as follows:

1. Generate a fresh AggregationJobID.
1. Decrypt the input share for each report share as described in
   {{input-share-decryption}}.
1. Check that the resulting input share is valid as described in
   {{input-share-validation}}.

If any step invalidates the report, the Leader rejects the report and removes
it from the set of candidate reports.

Next, for each report the Leader executes the following procedure:

~~~
state = VDAF.ping_pong_start(vdaf_verify_key,
                             True,
                             agg_param,
                             report_id,
                             public_share,
                             plaintext_input_share.payload)
if state != Rejected():
  (state, outbound) = VDAF.ping_pong_req(agg_param, state, None)
~~~

where:

* `vdaf_verify_key` is the VDAF verification key for the task
* `agg_param` is the VDAF aggregation parameter provided by the Collector (see
  {{collect-flow}})

> * `report_id` is the report ID, used as a nonce

Reviewer: I don't really think we need to clarify this, as this is already clear in the upload section. But if we do want to re-iterate, then let's make sure we're clear about which parameter we mean.
```suggestion
* `report_id` is the report ID, used as the nonce for VDAF sharding
```

Reviewer: Works for me.

* `public_share` is the report's public share
* `plaintext_input_share` is the Leader's `PlaintextInputShare`

The methods are defined in {{!VDAF}}. This process determines the initial
per-report `state`, as well as the initial `outbound` message to send to the
Helper. (These are coalesced into a single HTTP request to the Helper as
described below.) If `state == Rejected()`, then the report is rejected and
removed from the set of candidate reports.

[[OPEN ISSUE #470: update references to the ping-pong API, once a VDAF draft is
published which describes it.]]

Next, for each candidate report the Leader constructs a `PrepareInit` message
structured as follows:

~~~
struct {

>   ReportMetadata report_metadata;
>   opaque public_share<0..2^32-1>;
>   HpkeCiphertext encrypted_input_share;

Reviewer: I think we should continue to define the `ReportShare` struct, even if we don't need to. This way it's clear what we mean by "report share".
```suggestion
  ReportShare report_share;
```

Reviewer 2: What if we just rename `struct PrepareInit` to `struct ReportShare`?

  HpkeCiphertext encrypted_input_share;
} ReportShare;

struct {

>   ReportShare report_share;

Author: (also cleaned up a few places that were still referring to `AggregateJobInitReq.report_shares` instead of `AggregateJobInitReq.report_inits`)

#### Leader Initialization {#leader-init}

The Leader begins the aggregate initialization phase with the set of candidate
reports as follows:

1. Generate a fresh AggregationJobID. The ID value MUST be unique within the
   scope of the corresponding DAP task.
1. Decrypt the input share for each report share as described in
   {{input-share-decryption}}.
1. Check that the resulting input share is valid as described in
   {{input-share-validation}}.

If any step invalidates the report, the Leader removes the report from the set
of candidate reports. Next, the Leader initializes VDAF preparation by running
the following procedure for each report, with function definitions from

> {{!VDAF}}:

Reviewer: Let's add a TODO here describing the current state of affairs: We'll need to cut a draft of VDAF with the new API and update the references here.

~~~
state = VDAF.ping_pong_start(vdaf_verify_key,

>                              true,

Reviewer: For consistency with the VDAF draft (here and below)
```suggestion
                             True,
```

  Helper MUST abort with error "queryMismatch".

* The sequence of report shares to aggregate. The `encrypted_input_share` field
  of the `ReportAggregationInitReq` is the `HpkeCiphertext` whose index in

>   `Report.encrypted_input_shares` is equal to the index of the Helper, i.e. 1.

Author: I don't mind doing this, but it can be added on in a later PR -- let's get the technical bits correct here before we update all of the other text, to keep scope in check?

  The `leader_prep_share` field is the preparation share resulting from the

>   Leader's VDAF initialization for this report.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Leader's VDAF preparation initialization for this report.
```

#### Helper Initialization {#aggregation-helper-init}

The Helper begins their portion of the aggregate initialization phase with the
set of candidate report shares obtained in an `AggregationJobInitReq` message
from the leader. It attempts to recover and validate the corresponding input
shares similarly to the Leader, and eventually returns a response to the Leader

> carrying a VDAF-specific message for each report.

Reviewer: Maybe be specific here?
```suggestion
carrying the first-round preparation message for each report.
```

  ReportID report_id;
  PrepareStepResult prepare_step_result;
  select (PrepareStep.prepare_step_result) {

>     case continued: opaque prep_msg<0..2^32-1>; /* VDAF preparation share or message */

Reviewer 2: IIUC, `ReportInitialization.init_prep_step` and `ReportInitialization.stepped_prepare_step` should always be in the same state (that is, both continued, both finished, or both failed), right? If so, then it's unfortunate that this representation allows constructing invalid combinations of `init_prep_step` and `stepped_prepare_step`. How about:

```suggestion
    case continued: {
        opaque init_prep_msg<0..2^32-1>; /* VDAF preparation share or message */
        opaque stepped_prepare_msg<0..2^32-1>; /* VDAF preparation share or message */
    }
```
(or substitute something that is valid in the presentation language)

And then `struct ReportInitialization` would contain a single `PrepareStep`. This would also avoid transmitting the same `report_id` value twice in each `ReportInitialization`.

Author: `init_prep_step` and `stepped_prepare_step` won't necessarily be in the same state: see the Input Share Preparation section. `init_prep_step` includes the helper's first call to `prep_next`, `stepped_prepare_step` includes the helper's second call to `prep_next`.

(note that the use of `PrepareStep` in this way does repeat the `report_id` unnecessarily; `PrepareStep` is still used in a number of places that need to include a `report_id`. It'd be easy enough to factor the messages into `PrepareStep`-without-report-ID & `PrepareStep`-with-report-ID, but I'll do so once we're happy with the general approach.)

    case finished:  Empty;
    case failed:    ReportShareError;
  };
} PrepareStep;

struct {
  PrepareStep init_prep_step<0..2^32-1>;

>   PrepareStep stepped_prepare_step<0..2^32-1>;

Author: er, yeah, I think this was initially `opaque` and then I didn't update it properly.

  `time_interval`, the batch is not determined until the Collector's query is
  issued (see {{query}}).

* `report_inits`: The Helper's share of information about each report to be
  aggregated in this aggregation job. The value of the
  `report_share.encrypted_input_share` field is taken from the
  `Report.helper_encrypted_input_share` field in the original report.

>   `leader_prep_share` is the Leader's prepare message-share as computed during

Author: (cleaned up all instances of "prepare/preparation message-share" throughout.)

  the VDAF initialization process.

Let `{helper}` denote the Helper's API endpoint. The Leader sends a PUT request
to `{helper}/tasks/{task-id}/aggregation_jobs/{aggregation-job-id}` with its
`AggregationJobInitReq` message as the payload. The media type is
"application/dap-aggregation-job-init-req". The Leader's aggregation job is now

> in round 0.

Author: I agree; I've updated the Overview as suggested, and updated the use of "rounds" throughout to be more clear.

The Helper's response will be an `AggregationJobResp` message (see
{{aggregation-helper-init}}, which the Leader validates according to the
criteria in {{aggregation-job-validation}}. If the message is invalid, the
Leader should abandon the aggregation job entirely.

> 

Author: I think I'd like to leave this as-is -- the obvious fix that comes to mind would be to break leader/helper initialization into three sections: "leader initialization up to sending the message", "helper initialization", "leader initialization after receiving the response". I think this would be less understandable than the current forward-reference.

then `out` is the Leader's output share, in which case it stores the output
share for further processing as described in {{collect-flow}}. Otherwise, `out`
is the pair `(prep_state, leader_prep_share)`, where `prep_state` is its updated
preparation state and `leader_prep_share` is its next preparation message-share.
For the latter case, let `helper_prep_share` be the Helper's preparation
message-share from the `PrepareStep.prep_share` field; the Leader updates its
preparation state to the updated value and then computes:

~~~
prep_msg = VDAF.prep_shares_to_prep(agg_param, [
    leader_prep_share,
    helper_prep_share,
])
~~~

If this operation fails, then the Leader marks the report as invalid with error
`vdaf_prep_error`. Otherwise, the Leader moves to the aggregation job
continuation phase, as described in {{agg-continue-flow}}.

#### Helper Initialization {#aggregation-helper-init}

Each Helper begins their portion of the aggregate initialization when they
receive an `AggregationJobInitReq` message from the Leader. For each
`ReportPrepInit` conveyed by this message, the Helper attempts to initialize
VDAF preparation (see {{Section 5.1 of !VDAF}}) just as the Leader does. If

> successful, it includes its prepare message in its response that the Leader will

Author: (also cleaned up "prepare message" -> "preparation message" throughout.)

} PrepareStepState;

struct {
  PrepareStepState prepare_step_state;
  select (PrepareStep.prepare_step_state) {
    case continued: opaque prep_msg<0..2^32-1>; /* VDAF preparation message or share */
    case finished:  Empty;
    case failed:    ReportShareError;
  };
} PrepareStep;

struct {
  ReportID report_id;
  PrepareStep init_prep_step;

>   PrepareStep stepped_prep_step;

Reviewer: Hmm, what's going on here? IIUC this should carry the first-round prep message. Why do we have two PrepareStep's

Reviewer 2: I agree, there should just be the current round combined/broadcast prepare message in this message. Let's look at what the Helper does during initialization, and let's imagine this is a VDAF with more than one round.

~~~
prep_msg = VDAF.prep_shares_to_prep(agg_param, [leader_prep_share, helper_prep_share])
(next_prep_state, next_prep_share) = VDAF.prep_next(prep_state, prep_msg)
~~~

`leader_prep_share` is the leader's share of the 1st round prepare message, and is what was transmitted in the `AggregationJobInitReq`. `helper_prep_share` is the helper's share of the 1st round prepare message was derived from the encrypted report share by the helper. `prep_msg` is the combined/broadcast 1st round prepare message.

Helper then uses `prep_msg` and `prep_state`, which is its round 0 state, to advance to round 1. The outputs are the helper's round 1 state and the helper's share of round 2's prepare message. In order to advance the leader to round 1, the helper needs to send the leader `prep_msg`, so that the leader can then use its round 0 state and the round 1 combined/broadcast prepare message to advance to round 1. The leader doesn't need `next_prep_share` because when it continues, it's going to send its round 2 prepare message share to the helper in an AggregationJobContinueReq.

However, this discussion suggests a further possible optimization: if the helper did send the round 2 prepare message share along with the combined round 1 prepare message, then the leader could:

- advance to round 1 using the round 1 prepare message, obtaining its share of the round 2 prepare message
- combine its round 2 prepare message with the helper's share of the round 2 prepare message, yielding the round 2 combined prepare message
- advance itself to round 2
- transmit the round 2 combined prepare message to the helper in an `AggregationJobContinueReq`

Basically, the leader and helper would take turns combining prepare message shares and instructing the other aggregator to advance its round, which could eliminate round trips for VDAFs with more than one round.

Author: This change makes the first prepare message be computed from the prepare message shares by the Helper, and keeps all following prepare messages computed by the Leader. I went this way because it keeps more of the work being done by the Leader, and it's the "minimal" change to behavior in the sense that it changes the least about the protocol.

Tim, your first suggestion is equivalent to what is written in this PR except that the Helper is responsible for computing all of the prepare messages, because it changes things to have the leader send a prepare message share rather than a prepare message with each continuation. Your second suggestion is what is written down in this PR -- except that the Leader/Helper doesn't "take turns" (I'm not sure there's an advantage to implementing things this way). Both suggestions are the same number of round-trips, equal to the VDAF's `ROUNDS` parameter, and thus optimal in number of round-trips.

Author: (I guess the question is: who do we want to compute the prepare message, i.e. call `prep_shares_to_prep`, after initialization? Using this trick requires the Helper to call `prep_shares_to_prep` during initialization, but after that we can spell the protocol out to allow either the Leader or the Helper call `prep_shares_to_prep` on each continuation round. As-written, the Leader makes these calls; we could change things to have the Helper make these calls instead, or something more advanced like a turn-taking strategy. IMO, I'm happy with either the Leader or the Helper taking on this role, but don't think more advanced strategies where the Leader & Helper take turns are worth the protocol complexity.)

Reviewer: @tgeoghegan I don't think the change you suggest actually reduces the number of HTTP requests, does it? I don't see the benefit, and I think it makes things more complex.

@branlwyd  re what is the minimal change: I think this PR should make the following change: Instead of having the Leader run prep_shares_to_prep(), have the Helper do it. That would mean the Leader's request contains its perp share, and the Helper's response contains the prep message (i.e., the broadcast message).

Reviewer: Hopefully this will be more clear after #422.

Author: We went with an approach that implements Tim's ping-pong idea, reducing the number of network round trips by about half.

} ReportAggregationInitResp;

struct {
  ReportAggregationInitResp report_shares<1..2^32-1>;
} AggregationJobInitResp;
~~~

The message is a sequence of `ReportAggregationInitResp` values, the order of

> which matches that of the ReportShare values in

Reviewer: Unless we take my suggestion above, we need to change "ReportShare" here.

`AggregationJobInitReq.report_shares`. Each report that was marked as invalid is
assigned the `PrepareStepState` `failed`; if the prepare step corresponding to
`init_prep_step` fails, `stepped_prep_step` is unspecified. Otherwise, the
`PrepareStep`s are either marked as continued with the output `prep_msg`, or are
marked as finished if the VDAF preparation process is finished for the report

> share. The Helper's aggregation job is now in round 0.

Reviewer: Shouldn't it be "round 1", since the Helper has processed the round 1 prep message?

Author: I think that it is clearer if we maintain that the `round` counter counts DAP rounds (i.e. network round-trips), rather than VDAF rounds, since the DAP round is the "unit of continuation" -- if something goes wrong in transit during an aggregation continuation attempt, we'll be restarting from the beginning of the previous DAP round, rather than from a VDAF round that is traversed partway through a DAP round.

On success, the helper responds to the leader with HTTP status code 201 Created
and a body consisting of the `AggregationJobInitResp`, with media type

> "application/dap-aggregation-job-init-resp".

Reviewer: What's the reason for changing AggregationJobResp to AggregationJobInitResp?

Author: (this no longer applies with the new "ping-pong" approach)

  };
} PartialBatchSelector;

enum {
  initialize(0),
  continue(1),
  finish(2),
  finished(3),
  reject(4),
  (255)
} PrepareStepState;

struct {
  PrepareStepState prepare_step_state;
  select (PrepareStep.prepare_step_state) {
    case initialize: {
      ReportShare report_share;

>       opaque leader_prep_share<0..2^32-1>;

Author: Hmm, I kind of like calling out that this will always be the leader's preparation share; thoughts on keeping this as-is / maybe there's a great reason to rename that I'm overlooking?

>       opaque leader_prep_share<0..2^32-1>;

Reviewer: Actually, feel free to disrgard. I think we've moved beyond where this suggestion is helpful :)

Helper attempts to initialize VDAF preparation (see {{Section 5.1 of !VDAF}})
just as the Leader does. If successful, it includes the result in its response
that the Leader will use to continue preparing the report.

To begin this process, the Helper checks if it recognizes the task ID. If not,
then it MUST abort with error `unrecognizedTask`.

Next, the Helper checks that the report IDs in
`AggregationJobInitReq.prepare_inits` are all distinct. If two preparation
initialization messages have the same report ID, then the Helper MUST abort with
error `invalidMessage`.

The Helper is now ready to process each report share into an outbound prepare
step to return to the server. First the Helper preprocesses each report as
follows:

1. Decrypt the input share for each report share as described in
   {{input-share-decryption}}.
1. Check that the resulting input share is valid as described in
   {{input-share-validation}}.

For any report that was rejected, the Helper sets the outbound prep step to

~~~
struct {
  ReportId report_id;
  PrepareStepState prepare_step_state = reject;
  ReportShareError report_share_error;

> } PrepareStep;

Reviewer: Now that `PrepareStep` is never sent by the Leader by the Helper, perhaps it deserves a more distinguish name, like `PrepareResp` or something?

      specify the batch window instead.]

  The indicated query type MUST match the task's query type. Otherwise, the
  Helper MUST abort with error `invalidMessage`.

  This field is called the "partial" batch selector because, depending on the
  query type, it may not determine a batch. In particular, if the query type is
  `time_interval`, the batch is not determined until the Collector's query is
  issued (see {{query}}).

* `prepare_steps`: The Helper's share of information about each report to be
  aggregated in this aggregation job. This field is populated by translating
  each report's `outbound` message to a `PrepareStep` following the procedure in

>   {{ping-pong-translation}}.

Author: This is defined in the ping-pong-translation section; the text earlier in this section  specifying that any non-`PingPongInitialize` messages must be dropped ensures this translation will produce an `initialize` `PrepareStep`.

1. Initialize VDAF preparation and initial outputs as described in
   {{input-share-prep}}.

For each recovered input share, the Helper then proceeds as follows. Let
`leader_prep_share` represent the Leader's prepare message-share transmitted in
the `ReportPrepInit.leader_prep_share` field; let `helper_prep_share` represent
the Helper's prepare message-share recovered from the VDAF initialization
process. Then the Helper computes:

~~~
prep_msg = VDAF.prep_shares_to_prep(agg_param, [
    leader_prep_share,
    helper_prep_share,
])
out = VDAF.prep_next(prep_state, prep_msg)
~~~

If either of these operations fails, then the Helper marks the report as invalid
with error `vdaf_prep_error`. Otherwise it interprets `out` as follows. If this
is the last round of the VDAF, then `out` is the Helper's output share, in which
case it stores the output share for further processing as described in

> {{collect-flow}}. Otherwise, `out` is the pair `(prep_state,

Author: Yep -- the structure of the response message is defined later (in the second-to-last paragraph of this section). This paragraph determines how the values that eventually go into the message are computed.

Would you like to see an update here?

helper_prep_share)`, where `prep_state` is its updated preparation state and
`helper_prep_share` is its next preparation message-share. For the latter case,

> the Helper updates its preparation state to the updated value.

Author: OK -- I've made updates to the preparation state implicit.

  This field is called the "partial" batch selector because, depending on the
  query type, it may not determine a batch. In particular, if the query type is
  `time_interval`, the batch is not determined until the Collector's query is
  issued (see {{query}}).

* `prepare_steps`: the sequence of `PrepareStep` messages constructed in the
  previous step.

Finally, the Leader sends a PUT request to
`{helper}/tasks/{task-id}/aggregation_jobs/{aggregation-job-id}`, where
`{helper}` denotes the Helper's API endpoint. The payload is set to
`AggregationJobInitReq` and the media type is set to
"application/dap-aggregation-job-init-req".

The Helper's response will be an `AggregationJobResp` message (see
{{aggregation-helper-init}}, which the Leader validates according to the
criteria in {{aggregation-job-validation}}. If the message is invalid, the
Leader MUST abort the aggregation job.

Otherwise, the Leader proceeds as follows with each report:

1. If the inbound prep step has type "continue", then the Leader computes

   ~~~
   (state, outbound) = VDAF.ping_pong_req(agg_param, state, inbound)
   ~~~

   where `inbound` is the message payload. If `state == Rejected()`, then the

>    Leader rejects the report and removes it from the candidate set. If `state ==

Reviewer: I believe this is incorrect: If `state == Finished(out_share)` **but** `outbound != None`, then we need to send one more continuation request.

* `public_share` is the report's public share
* `plaintext_input_share` is the Helper's `PlaintextInputShare`

This procedure determines the initial per-report `state`, as well as the
initial `outbound` to send in response to the Leader. If `state == Rejected()`,
then the Helper responds with

~~~
struct {
  PrepareStepState prepare_step_state = 3; /* reject */
  ReportId report_id;
  ReportShareError report_share_error = 5; /* vdaf_prep_error */
} PrepareStep;
~~~

Otherwise the Helper responds with

~~~
struct {
  PrepareStepState prepare_step_state = 1; /* continue */
  ReportId report_id;
  opaque payload<0..2^32-1> = outbound;
} PrepareStep;
~~~

Finally, the Helper creates an `AggregationJobResp` to send to the Leader. This
message is structured as follows:

~~~
struct {
  PrepareStep prepare_steps<1..2^32-1>;
} AggregationJobResp;
~~~

where `prepare_steps` are the outbound prep steps computed in the previous
step. The order MUST match `AggregationJobInitReq.prepare_steps`.

The Helper responds to the Leader with HTTP status code 201 Created and
a body consisting of the `AggregationJobResp`, with media type
"application/dap-aggregation-job-resp".

> Finally, the Helper stores `state` to prepare for the next aggregation step
> ({{aggregation-helper-continuation}}, if the state is `Continued`) or for the
> collection flow ({{collect-flow}}, if the state is `Finished`).

Reviewer: * Let's parse out the `out_share`, since {{collect-flow}} knows nothing about `state`.
* Missing closed paran
* collect flow -> sub-protocol
* let's try to be as precise as we can, i.e., instead of "aggregation step", which is a bit ill-defined, let's say "continuation step", which we use elsewhere.
```suggestion
Finally, if `state == Continued(prep_state)` then the Helper stores `state` for the next continuation step
({{aggregation-helper-continuation}}). Otherwise, if `state == Finished(out_share)`, then the Helper stores `out_share` for use in the collection sub-protocol ({{collect-flow}}).
```

   removes it from the candidate set. Unless the error is `report_too_early`,
   the Leader MUST NOT include the report in a subsequent aggregation job.
   Otherwise, the Leader MAY include the report in a subsequent aggregation
   job.

1. Else the type is invalid, in which case the Leader MUST abort the
   aggregation job.

(Note: Since VDAF preparation completes in a constant number of rounds, it will
never be the case that some reports are completed and others are not.)

#### Helper Initialization {#aggregation-helper-init}

The Helper begins an aggregation job when it receives an
`AggregationJobInitReq` message from the Leader. For each `PrepareStep`
conveyed by this message, the Helper attempts to initialize VDAF preparation
(see {{Section 5.1 of !VDAF}}) just as the Leader does. If successful, it
includes the result in its response that the Leader will use to continue
preparing the report.

To begin this process, the Helper first checks if it recognizes the task ID. If
not, then it MUST abort with error `unrecognizedTask`.

Next, the Helper checks that the report IDs in
`AggregationJobInitReq.prepare_steps` are all distinct. If two prep step

> messages have the same report ID, then the Helper MUST abort with error

Reviewer 2: Technically it's the `report_share` inside the `PrepareStep` that has a report ID. I'm not sure if that's worth clarifying.

`invalidMessage`.

Next, the Helper checks that each prep step message has type "initialize". If

> not, it MUST abort with error `invalidMessage`.

Reviewer 2: If it's illegal for the `prepare_steps` in `AggregationJobInitReq` to ever be anything but `PrepareStep::initialize`, why bother with the enum at all? We could instead have something like `struct PrepareStepInit { ReportShare report_share; opaque payload<0..2^32-1>; }` and remove one possible source of bugs in implementations.

Author: I agree--in fact, splitting things into separate messages for initialization/continuation was the initial approach taken in this PR--but we decided to merge in order to be able to use the same types for initialization & continuation and to minimize the size of the PR. (https://github.com/ietf-wg-ppm/draft-ietf-ppm-dap/pull/393#discussion_r1117814328)

I'd prefer something like you suggest (that is, step-specific message types), but I would like consensus before making a change. @cjpatton?

Reviewer: Note that there are still more edge cases like this that we can't eliminate as easily.

Author: I introduced `PrepareInit` and `PrepareContinue` as messages that the Leader sends to the helper for initialization & continuation steps.

IMO, `PrepareStep`'s name is now iffy -- perhaps it should be something like `PrepareResponse`? -- but I think we can rename in a later PR, if we decide we want to.

  ReportID report_id;
  PrepareStepState prepare_step_state;
  select (PrepareStep.prepare_step_state) {
    case continued: {
      opaque prep_msg<0..2^32-1>;   /* VDAF preparation message */
      opaque prep_share<0..2^32-1>; /* VDAF preparation message-share */
    };

>     case finished:  opaque prep_msg<0..2^32-1>; /* VDAF preparation message */

Reviewer: The ladder diagram looks something like this:

| | |
|-|-|
| Leader -> Helper | report_share, [leader_prep_1] |
| Helper-> Leader | prep_1, [helper_prep_2] |
| Leader -> Helper | prep_2, [leader_prep_3] |
| Helper -> Leader | prep_3, [leader_prep_4] |

... and so on. The square brackets indicate an optional message that is only sent if there is another round.

* First message: helper_report_share, leader_prep_share_1
* Middle message: prep_I, prep_share_I+1 (either leader or helper)
* Odd round VDAF, penultimate message: prep_R-1, leader_prep_share_R
* Odd round VDAF, last message: prep_R
* Even round VDAF, penultimate message: prep_R
* Even round VDAF, last message: (nil)

Thus I think we have the following variants for PrepareStep (subsuming ReportInit, which, IMO would be a bit clearer):
```
struct {
  PrepareStepState prepare_step_state;
  select (PrepareStep.prepare_step_state) {
    case initialize:
      opaque report_share<0..2^32-1>;
      opaque prep_share<0..2^32-1>;
    case continue:
      ReportId report_id;
      opaque prep_msg<0..2^32-1>;
      opaque prep_share<0..2^32-1>;
    case finish:
      ReportId report_id;
      opaque prep_msg<0..2^32-1>;
    case finished:
      ReportId report_id;
    case reject:
      ReportId report_id;
      ReportShareError error;
  };
} PrepareStep;
```

The reason I changed the verb tense is to distinguish between finish and finished, the latter being the variant without the payload sent by the Helper in even-round VDAFs. I've also changed "failed" to "reject", as the latter is maybe more inline with the verbage we have.

>     case finished:  opaque prep_msg<0..2^32-1>; /* VDAF preparation message */

Author: Done. I like dropping `ReportPrepInit`. Please review closely that everything is updated appropriately for the new messages -- there's probably at least a few places I didn't explain halding the newly-possible unexpected prepare step states explicitly enough.

} AggregationJobResp;
~~~

The message is a sequence of `PrepareStep` values, the order of which matches
that of the ReportShare values in `AggregationJobInitReq.report_shares`. Each
report that was marked as invalid is assigned the `PrepareStepState` `failed`.
Otherwise, the `PrepareStep` is either marked as continued with the output
`prep_msg` & `prep_share`, or is marked as finished if the VDAF preparation
process is finished for the report share with the final `prep_msg`. The Helper's

> aggregation job is now in round 0.

Reviewer 2: I get the distinction you're drawing between DAP round and VDAF round, and agree that for a 1-round VDAF, it won't really matter, because on retry, the leader will re-send `AggregationJobInitReq`. But then I think we need to make sure the leader and helper continuation sections make it clear when either advances to the next round. Right now, the discussion of how the leader constructs `AggregationJobContinueReq` reads (lines 1596-1597):

>The `round` field is the round of **VDAF preparation** that the Leader just reached
>and wants the Helper to advance to.

Emphasis mine. I think it might suffice to change that from "VDAF preparation" to something like "DAP aggregation".

I put together a pair of diagrams to work out just when the DAP and VDAF round transitions occur to make sure I understand this. Would you take a look and confirm to me that we're understanding this the same way?

[2 round VDAF, no failures](https://sequencediagram.org/index.html#initialData=CoSwLgNgpgBATDATgewK4DsAmMBqARAQQDEYAKKAOgHMKYAFZABwgENEBKAKE8bbBADGIXujAwAMlBaYoiHn0HCWomAAkoERrO4AjZAA8YyAG6yJUmYgBc0aWYDOYFmFgAGGAF5cmFgDMKjIhQjAD6IOjgpLaWSMHIiGL2ABZsUOwAOuhRFg5OLjAAjAA0MNFmgcEwyakwruye3n4BQaHoUPpg2XaIVXluJQByyG1ceoYmZpLdVo7xsCxUVEFUziDDMABWyDowAO7gSUhoWA2uJWU9js6wBZyIY0amPVOWVlCiZvjERxjYrpnvFw9Qh0H4nVycF6yAC0AD51JpZFYCItlqthgApbYASQiYAASlAAI6kJIaLQ9FrxRIpILnHI9CqMKq0tyjAyPMwIilWMmIy59WoNHA+fxMsJ40nksxUhIs1IZLJ8im9a6FErK8oteVBWr1LwipritodKX81X5M4wIYjO4PCY9blIwGfQgkFC-Wqce1PNTS6xMmAAW3sVCFBtFzWCIWqQXsITAyBCTLNKsDsf6pQZMHTrL1mVTuTVcA1-pz2ozhX1jTFLRCJs6moFauK5cqIbDdW9HIdfv5M0TuoWSygK346y2O32YEOHpOXitTYtsDgdp7vqd1hdPS+7uO2AKAI+wIIoLnf04m7hUOsKJHY7W6CxOkJ9kYpDoLVSAGUXIwrFYADCwz8OgqBQKQgYdrUpbmrmNQFOw7LjL6N5WL4UBgAIhzDmi47oJs2x7AcYLYAu9LdMuhTdihkwMlYXQxFc+QllmlHwbqiHCpGxrtJ0FxUa2UGhnqa60c89HbrgbqkdRPp0dMwlhgU3FGnWGbxomyYtIxWqVJWrZLhxNyKmgNI1BGanRg2unNixJRKVWNGchJ0y9HMMC4aO6IEZOxEzrJXitmZOpQGJLnmNMUm7rJcBHkCMAgrJtw3nCm7Iqi3n4c+wGiOE4GEiS54NK2n7BD+f4AUQ4QgMkUCYJB2rQYhyERelGFYThmUPhORHTrO+6nLBKrMSuzm9ulIWVpZtbWXxhZ2SuDlNSJiHjRu-oDh5Xk9b5fUkcVQUlFNrLhRNm3RTJxVxW0x6JaeyWXv6170XeeGPs+r7vmVvBBL+wRVTVdUNQA3gAvuwQA)

[2 round VDAF, response dropped during continuation](https://sequencediagram.org/index.html#initialData=CoSwLgNgpgBATDATgewK4DsAmMBqARAQQDEYAKKAOgHMKYAFZABwgENEBKGAd3AAsYAZixARUiKACgJjNmBABjEDPRgYAGSgtMURNNkKlLFTAASUCIx1SARsgAeMZADcd6zdsQAuaFtcBnMBYwWAAGGABeXEwWAQpGcUYAfRB0cFIfDyQoRmREVT9eNih2AB10dPd-QOCYAEYAGhgM13jsmAKimBDOSJxo2Nak9Cg7MArfRHbq0MaAOWRh9glbB2dXDQnPANzYFioqcSogkAWYACtka24+JDQsCK7G5smAoNhaiUQVxxdJjY9PFAVK58MRbhhsCEykDgpNCHRwfcQhJ-joALQAPjMFh0ngI+0OxwWAClLgBJVJgABKUAAjqReOZLJMErl8oVxE9KpNBu0OaElt81pNsczPIycS9pl0Hn0YnEEslKQyma5WXk+UVSuUJcypm86o1dS0EprxF0elF5YNEsNRirJfqaiE5gtip8hb9TKqvDCQYQSCgIV1lvYfq5RbjeQBbPxUGW9foK7KJDriPyJMDIRKDB163lpmZNbkwAv8i1lPNVA1wI0+0umwt1S1ygaKu1jY1Sg0NBttWPx7qh1ZeyNebbmvYHKBHOSnC5XHhgfhB+6RF0wLtO2BwD1h4XeyWA4GTUGBu7YWrQk8weGIyESMeY1FefHT2cndCk6w0vyMUh0AkRQAMrBIwnieAAwgscjoKgUCkDGcaPJu9Zlp0tTsIK+5ei+ngCFAYDyPwU6EnO6DnJc1zLveDwbs8251MO4Z-NynjjJkrw1LWxYTH2jBmu8LZJjaHYcdWNS9khg5LF8OHrGxfqngGtEfJ6CmbNJdSyiJiqFhmWY5gk4k8o25a9lu6HmphZRoOynSJta7YjGMDFcTujRaZhzEHnhUw7DApEzkSFELtRK4Xg8vZ2YJe4jhpAJKbgKmrtgcDXrCt4EAiqVMS+mJjniBLBeR37QSoKTwTS9K5ZEvaAdkIFgRBRApCABRQJgiGmgOzbYfFIo+vhhHEYFxUfvOVFLhFwbrnWjrufAPmjkNMVNo5bYpmJW6LTxXn9Sxh5ihOuzjSFlGLjctWGo4qD2eIcWHYVSVnrR6XDDed65R8T4AMTiJgngAMx2Hhb5kZ+36-v+DUyOIoHZC1bUdV1ADeAC+B2+Wx4hgIgACeUzZIwKTxkFE2hZcKLcgVQ3gyVkOXOVsFVXSpDXfVQHw81nitakKPdf2yGYVjK1HgRREkWd5EXeFtF1Y0a38stEZDeT51he1gUQOIWiE6cX2Rb2CSsIT2jBPIwSYI+PrPmx9MU1DUB-gBXNQAj4G88jjJo5jEhAA)

> aggregation job is now in round 0.

Author: Good point -- I switched the description of the `round` field to explicitly describe DAP rounds rather than VDAF rounds.

I think the sequence diagrams are roughly correct. (I'm not sure what it means to "enter into" a round, or why the rounds are entered at the points where they are in the sequence, but the counts are correct vs network round trips.)

Ultimately I think it's more useful to count DAP rounds over VDAF rounds because the purpose of the `round` field is to enable retries. The unit of retries in DAP is the network request, rather than a VDAF round. (this is confounded by the fact that, before this change, a DAP network request could be 1-1 mapped to a VDAF round.)

} AggregationJobResp;
~~~

> The message is a sequence of `PrepareStep` values, the order of which matches

Author: Nor with Janus, I think a `MUST` makes sense here.

                            report_id,
                            public_share,
                            plaintext_input_share.payload)
(prep_state, prep_share) = VDAF.prep_next(prep_state, None)
~~~

`vdaf_verify_key` is the VDAF verification key shared by the aggregators;
`agg_id` is the aggregator ID (`0x00` for the Leader and `0x01` for the Helper);
`agg_param` is the opaque aggregation parameter distributed to the aggregators
by the collector; `public_share` is the public share generated by the client and
distributed to each aggregator; and `plaintext_input_share` is the aggregator's
PlaintextInputShare.

At this point, the Leader would send the resulting preparation share in its
`AggregationJobInitReq` to the Helper in its
`ReportAggregationInitReq.leader_prep_share` field, and continue this process
once it receives a response from the Helper. The Helper would continue this
process immediately.

> Next, aggregators run the following procedure to receive the next step:

Reviewer: Only the Helper runs prep_shares_to_prep.

Previously, the Leader had gathered the shares, combined them into the message, then sends the message to the Helper; now the Helper gathers the shares, combines them into the message, and sends the message to the Leader.

Author: Argh, that's what I meant to write. I split this out explicitly now.

One thought: the `input-share-prep` section now describes two slightly-different procedures for the Leader & Helper. WDYT about moving this section into the `leader-init` & `helper-init` sections? I think this would likely be clearer, especially now that the aggregators are following slightly different processes, and would match the structure of the continuation section.

#### Leader Continuation {#aggregation-leader-continuation}

The Leader begins each round of continuation for a report based on its locally

> computed prepare message and the previous PrepareStep from the helper. If

Reviewer: Hmm, doesn't the Leader need the previous PrepareStep in order to compute its next prep share?

If the Helper's `PrepareStep` is of type `continued`, then the Leader proceeds
as follows.

> Let `leader_outbound` denote the Leader's prepare share and `helper_outbound`

Reviewer: I think you used the term "leader_prep_share" above; perhaps replace "leader_outbound" with "leader_prep_share" for consistency? (The new name is much better, IMO!)

### Aggregate Continuation {#agg-continue-flow}

In the continuation phase, the leader drives the VDAF preparation of each share
In the continuation phase, the Leader drives the VDAF preparation of each share
in the candidate report set until the underlying VDAF moves into a terminal
state, yielding an output share for all Aggregators or an error. This phase may
state, yielding an output share for all aggregators or an error. This phase may
involve multiple rounds of interaction depending on the underlying VDAF. Each
round trip is initiated by the leader.
round trip is initiated by the Leader.

#### Leader Continuation {#aggregation-leader-continuation}

The Leader begins each round of continuation for a report share based on its
locally computed prepare message and the previous PrepareStep from the Helper.
If PrepareStep is of type `failed`, then the leader acts based on the value of
the `ReportShareError`:

  - If the error is `ReportShareError.report_too_early`, then the leader MAY try
    to re-send the report in a later `AggregationJobInitReq`.
  - For any other error, the leader marks the report as failed, removes it from

>     the candidate report set and does not process it further.

Reviewer 2: I don't think the new text discusses what the leader should do if the `PrepareStep` is of type `failed`.

processed further and MUST be removed from the candidate set.

If the Helper's `PrepareStep` is of type `continued`, then the Leader proceeds
as follows.

Let `leader_prep_share` denote the Leader's prepare message-share and
`helper_prep_share` denote the Helper's. The Leader computes the next state
transition as follows:

~~~
prep_msg = VDAF.prep_shares_to_prep(agg_param, [
    leader_prep_share,
    helper_prep_share,
])
out = VDAF.prep_next(prep_state, prep_msg)
~~~

where `[leader_prep_share, helper_prep_share]` is a vector of two elements. If
either of these operations fails, then the leader marks the report as invalid
with error "prep_share_failed". Otherwise it interprets `out` as follows: If
this is the last round of the VDAF, then `out` is the Leader's output share, in
which case it stores the output share for further processing as described in
{{collect-flow}}. Otherwise, `out` is the pair `(next_prep_state,
next_prep_share)`, where `next_prep_state` is its updated state and
`next_prep_share` is its next preparation message-share (which will be
`leader_prep_share` in the next round of continuation). For the latter case, the
helper sets `prep_state` to `next_prep_state`.

> The Leader now advances its aggregation job to the next round (round 1 if this

Reviewer: Runon sentence. Can we split it up?

} AggregationJobContinueReq;
~~~

> The `round` field is the round of DAP preparation that the Leader just reached

Reviewer: In order to avoid conflating "VDAF rounds" with "DAP rounds" I think it would be helpful to rename `round`. How about `request_num`?

Author: (I renamed "DAP round" to "step" or "aggregation step", as "request number" led to text that was somewhat more awkward/confusing, but I definitely agree with the intent of the suggestion.)

Otherwise, let `prep_msg` be the preparation message received in the
`PrepareStep.prep_msg` field. The Helper computes the following:

~~~
out = VDAF.prep_next(prep_state, prep_msg)
~~~

It interprets `out` as follows. If this is the last round of the VDAF, then
`out` is the Helper's output share; the Helper will send a `finished`
`PrepareStep` with an empty `prep_msg` field. (If one aggregator finished but
the other did not, then the report cannot be processed further and the Helper
MUST respond with a "vdaf_prep_error" failure.) Otherwise, `out` is the pair
`(prep_state, helper_prep_share)`, where `prep_state` is the Helper's updated
preparation state & `helper_prep_share` is the Helper's next preparation share;
the Helper will update its preparation state to `prep_state` and continue as
follows. (If this operation fails, the Helper marks the report as failed with a
"vdaf_prep_error".)

Let `leader_prep_share` be the preparation share received in the
`PrepareStep.prep_share` field. The Helper will then compute the following:

~~~
prep_msg = VDAF.prep_shares_to_prep(agg_param, [
    leader_prep_share,
    helper_prep_share,
])
out = VDAF.prep_next(prep_state, prep_msg)
~~~

> If either of these operations fails, then the Helper marks the report as invalid

Reviewer 2: I'm happy to move forward with this as-is and we can try reducing this text in the future.

} AggregationJobContinueReq;
~~~

The `step` field is the step of DAP aggregation that the Leader just reached
and wants the Helper to advance to. The `prepare_steps` field is the sequence
of prep steps constructed in the previous step. The `PrepareStep`s MUST be in
the same order as the previous aggregate request.

The Helper's response will be an `AggregationJobResp` message (see
{{aggregation-helper-init}}), which the Leader validates according to the
criteria in {{aggregation-job-validation}}. If the message is invalid, the
Leader MUST abort the aggregation job.

Otherwise, the Leader proceeds as follows with each report:

1. If the inbound prep step type is "continue", then the Leader computes

   ~~~
   (state, outbound) = VDAF.ping_pong_req(agg_param, state, inbound)
   ~~~

   where `inbound` is the payload of the prep step. If `state == Rejected()`,
   then the Leader rejects the report and removes it from the candidate set. If
   `state == Continued(prep_state)`, then another continuation step is required;
   the Leader stores `state` and `outbound` for the next continuation step. If
   `state == Finished(out_share)`, then preparation is complete and the Leader

>    stores the output share for use in the collection flow ({{collect-flow}}).

Reviewer: This is also incorrect I'm pretty sure: if `outbound != None` but `state == Finished(out_share)` then we need to be sure to send the last outbound message.

An `AggregationJobResp` is valid only if it satisfies the following requirement:

* The Helper's `prepare_steps` MUST include exactly the same report IDs in the
  same order as either the `prepare_steps` in the Leader's
  `AggregationJobInitReq` (if this is the first step of the aggregation job) or
  `AggregationJobContinueReq` (if this is a subsequent step).

[[OPEN ISSUE: consider relaxing this ordering constraint. See issue#217.]]

### Aggregate Continuation {#agg-continue-flow}

In the continuation phase, the Leader drives the VDAF preparation of each share
in the candidate report set until the underlying VDAF moves into a terminal
state, yielding an output share for both Aggregators or a rejection. This phase
may involve multiple HTTP requests from Leader to Helper depending on the
underlying VDAF.

#### Leader Continuation {#aggregation-leader-continuation}

The Leader begins each step of aggregation continuation with a prep state object

> `state`, which will be `Continued(prep_state)`, and an outbound message

Reviewer: If the VDAF is 2-round, then `state == Finished(out_share)`. I'd suggest just not asserting the type of `state` here.

```suggestion
`state` and an outbound message
```

report the Leader constructs a prep step as:

~~~
struct {
  PrepareStepState prepare_step_state = 1; /* continue */
  ReportId report_id;
  opaque payload<0..2^32-1> = outbound;
} PrepareStep;
~~~

where `report_id` is the report ID associated with `state` and `outbound`.

Next, the Leader sends a POST request to the aggregation job URI used during
initialization (see {{leader-init}}) with media type
"application/dap-aggregation-job-continue-req" and body structured as:

~~~
struct {
  u16 step;
  PrepareStep prepare_steps<1..2^32-1>;
} AggregationJobContinueReq;
~~~

The `step` field is the step of DAP aggregation that the Leader just reached
and wants the Helper to advance to. The `prepare_steps` field is the sequence
of prep steps constructed in the previous step. The `PrepareStep`s MUST be in
the same order as the previous aggregate request.

The Helper's response will be an `AggregationJobResp` message (see
{{aggregation-helper-init}}), which the Leader validates according to the
criteria in {{aggregation-job-validation}}. If the message is invalid, the
Leader MUST abort the aggregation job.

Otherwise, the Leader proceeds as follows with each report:

> 1. If the inbound prep step type is "continue", then the Leader computes

Reviewer: I think the condition here should be `inbound is "continue" && state == Continued(prep_state)`. If the Leader is instate `Finished`, then inbound prep step type being `"continue"` is a Helper-side bug and we should abort.

criteria in {{aggregation-job-validation}}. If the message is invalid, the
Leader MUST abort the aggregation job.

Otherwise, the Leader proceeds as follows with each report:

1. If the inbound prep step type is "continue" and the state is
   `Continued(prep_state)`, then the Leader computes

   ~~~
   (state, outbound) = VDAF.ping_pong_req(agg_param, state, inbound)
   ~~~

   where `inbound` is the message payload. If `outbound != None`, then the
   Leader stores `state` and `outbound` and proceeds to another continuation
   step. If `outbound == None`, then the preparation process is complete: either
   `state == Rejected()`, in which case the Leader rejects the report and
   removes it from the candidate set; or `state == Finished(out_share)`, in
   which case preparation is complete and the Leader stores the output share for
   use in the collection sub-protocol {{collect-flow}}.

1. Else if the type is "finished" and `state == Finished(out_share)`, then
   preparation is complete and the Leader stores the output share for use in
   the collection flow ({{collect-flow}}).

1. Else if the type is "reject", then the Leader rejects the report and removes

>    it from the candidate set.

Reviewer 2: Do we also need the exception here for `report_too_early` to match that in `{{leader-init}}`, or do we claim that this is impossible because any too early reports would have been rejected previously?

Author: I think it's the latter. (An implementation could guard against internal clock skew by adding the check here too, I suppose, but I think that's best left to implementations.)

Reviewer: Good catch. In the absence of a MUST or MUST NOT stating otherwise, `report_too_early` is valid here. I would copy the language here.

1. Else the type is invalid, in which case the Leader MUST abort the

>    aggregation job.

Reviewer 2: If we take my other suggestion to change the definition of `AggregationJobInitReq` (https://github.com/ietf-wg-ppm/draft-ietf-ppm-dap/pull/393/files#r1228639257), then I think we could change the definition of `struct PrepareStep` such that invalid types are impossible, and then this is one more check implementations don't have to worry about.

Orthogonally to that suggestion, I think this text could be moved into `{{aggregation-job-validation}}`, just to avoid repeating it here and in the aggregation init section.

Author: (waiting to resolve the step-specific-message issue before addressing the first part of this comment)

I disagree with the second part -- if anything, I'd say we should "inline" the content of `{{aggregation-job-validation}]` and then eliminate that section entirely. The reasoning for this is that documents should be optimized for the reader over the writer/maintainer (IMO), readers have a much easier time comprehending a document that is readable in a linear fashion, and this particular section contains a single small validation check. Repetition is IMO justified in this case, as it leads to a more understandable document with very little cost to maintainability.

Also, note that the `Leader Initialization` & `Leader Continuation` next-step logic is slightly different, i.e. in handling of a `finished` incoming message. We could call out the special case in the section we factored this out to, but if we have to have a special case for every place we are referring to the section, IMO that makes the proposed factoring less valuable.

Reviewer 2: Given that there's only a single item in `{{aggregation-job-validation}}`, I'm inclined to agree that we could inline that section. I think we could punt that to a later change since (IIRC) this PR does not modify `{{aggregation-job-validation}}`.

Reviewer: This text is still needed: There is the case that the Leader is in state `Finished` but the inbound message is `continue`.

Reviewer 2: Filed https://github.com/ietf-wg-ppm/draft-ietf-ppm-dap/issues/473 so we don't have to do that change here.

#### Helper Continuation {#aggregation-helper-continuation}

The Helper begins each step of continuation with a sequence of `state` objects,
which will be `Continued(prep_state)`, one for each report in the candidate set.

The Helper awaits an HTTP POST request to the aggregation job URI from the
Leader, the body of which is an `AggregationJobContinueReq` as specified in
{{aggregation-leader-continuation}}.

Next, it checks that it recognizes the task ID. If not, then it MUST abort with
error `unrecognizedTask`.

Next, it checks if it recognizes the indicated aggregation job ID. If not, it
MUST abort with error `unrecognizedAggregationJob`.

Next, the Helper checks that:

1. the report IDs are all distinct
1. each report ID corresponds to one of the `state` objects

> 1. each prepare step has message type "continue"

Reviewer 2: Similarly to my comment on the init case: we could define `AggregationJobContinueReq` to contain a sequence of `struct PrepareStepContinue { ReportId report_id; opaque payload<0..2^32-1>; }` and make this easier to implement.

Author: (waiting to resolve the step-specific-message issue before addressing the first part of this comment)

Reviewer: I believe that's incorrect. There are three possible variants: "continue", "finished", and "reject". "finished" and "reject" would be invalid.

Author: I introduced `PrepareInit` & `PrepareContinue` as specializations of the Leader's messages.

An `AggregationJobResp` is valid only if it satisfies the following requirement:

* The Helper's `prepare_steps` MUST include exactly the same report IDs in the
  same order as either the `prepare_steps` in the Leader's
  `AggregationJobInitReq` (if this is the first step of the aggregation job) or
  `AggregationJobContinueReq` (if this is a subsequent step).

[[OPEN ISSUE: consider relaxing this ordering constraint. See issue#217.]]

### Aggregate Continuation {#agg-continue-flow}

In the continuation phase, the Leader drives the VDAF preparation of each share
in the candidate report set until the underlying VDAF moves into a terminal
state, yielding an output share for both Aggregators or a rjection. This phase
may involve multiple HTTP requests from Leader to Helper depending on the
underlying VDAF.

#### Leader Continuation {#aggregation-leader-continuation}

The Leader begins each step of aggregation continuation with a prep state
object `state` and an outbound message `outbound` for each report in the
candidate set.

> If `state == Finished(out_share)` and `outbound == None` for each report, then

Reviewer: Right now the control flow is something like this:

```
leader init
- send an aggregate init request, handle response
- go to leader continue

leader continue
- If there is nothing to do then halt. Otherwise send aggregate continue request and handle response
- go to leader continue
```

It sounds like your suggesting something like this?

```
leader init
- send an aggregate init request, handle response
- go to leader continue

leader continue
- If there is something to do, then send aggregate continue request and handle response
- If there is nothing to do, then halt.
- go to leader continue
```

That seems fine, although maybe a bit more complicated to write in English? Up to you, please feel free to push to your own PR :D

> If `state == Finished(out_share)` and `outbound == None` for each report, then

Author: I wrote this up, PTAL.

   ~~~
   state, outbound = VDAF.ping_pong_next(True,
                                         agg_param,
                                         state,
                                         inbound)
   ~~~

   wheere `inbound` is the payload of the prep step. If `state == Rejected()`,
   then the Leader rejects the report and removes it from the candidate set.
   Otherwise it stores `state` and `outbound` for the next step of
   continuation.

1. Else if the type is "finished" and `state == Finished(out_share)`, then the
   Leader sets `outbound` to `None` and stores `state` and `outbound` for the
   next step of continuation.

1. Else If the inbound prep step type is "reject", then the Leader rejects the
   report and removes it from the candidate set.

1. Else the type is invalid, in which case the Leader MUST abort the
   aggregation job.

Finally, the Leader begins another continuation step with each `state` and
`outbound`.

#### Helper Continuation {#aggregation-helper-continuation}

The Helper begins each step of continuation with a sequence of `state` objects,
one for each report in the candidate set.

> If `state == Finished(out_share)` for each report, then preparation is complete

Reviewer: Actually at this point the Helper has sent a response to `AggregateInitReq`. If the VDAF is 1-round, then the payload is the prep message and it has nothing more to do.

> If `state == Finished(out_share)` for each report, then preparation is complete

Author: (continuing this in the other thread about where to write the text about aggregators noticing they are done & stopping)

of rounds, it will never be the case that some reports are completed and others
are not.)

the Helper awaits an HTTP POST request to the aggregation job URI from the
Leader, the body of which is an `AggregationJobContinueReq` as specified in
{{aggregation-leader-continuation}}.

Next, Helper begins by checking that it recognizes the task ID. If not, then it
MUST abort with error `unrecognizedTask`.

Next, it checks if it recognizes the indicated aggregation job ID. If not, it
MUST abort with error `unrecognizedAggregationJob`.

Next, the Helper checks that:

1. the report IDs are all distinct
1. each report ID corresponds to one of the `state` objects
1. each prepare step has message type "continue"
1. `AggregationJobContinueReq.step` is not equal to `0`

If any of these checks fail, then the Helper MUST abort with error
`invalidMessage`. Additionally, if any prep step appears out of order relative
to the previous request, then the Helper MAY abort with error `invalidMessage`.
(Note that a report may be missing, in which case the Helper should assume the
Leader rejected it.)

[OPEN ISSUE: Issue 448: It may be useful for the Leader to explicitly signal
rejection.]

> Next, the Helper checks if the continuation step indicated by the request is

Author: There are a few questions to me as to whether the step tracking is still needed; I think it is, and this text is why. Without tracking aggregation progress in some way, we wouldn't be able to recognize when we're in a skew state.

Of course, the DAP step is now redundant with the VDAF round, which as of the latest VDAF ping-pong iteration is tracked in the state. So, we could drop the DAP step & track retries with VDAF round. But I think this isn't a good idea for two reasons:

1. The DAP round goes 1, 2, 3...; the VDAF rounds that are recorded will go 2, 4, 6... This would mean that a continuation request could be sent with an odd round; I suppose we should fail in this case, but an implementation will be happier if we arrange things such that this error condition can't exist at all.

2. The VDAF round only needs to be tracked in state because `ping_pong_next` needs to use it to parse the `inbound` message. But this means that parsing the `inbound` message will require shared context (i.e. correct parsing requires the aggregators to agree on the VDAF round). Since the current round information is sent in the same `AggregationContinueReq` as the `inbound` message itself, this means that aggregator implementations will need to ensure they split parsing. If they don't, they'll see rare errors that occur only during round-skew.

Reviewer: > There are a few questions to me as to whether the step tracking is still needed; I think it is, and this text is why. Without tracking aggregation progress in some way, we wouldn't be able to recognize when we're in a skew state.

I agree that continuation step tracking is necessary in order to implement skew recovery -- what I'm questioning is whether we need such explicit language about it. For instance we say things like:

> The Leader is now in DAP step 0.
> The Leader advances to the next DAP step.
> The Leader sends a message to the Helper to say that it should advance to the next DAP step.

I think it would be simpler to just say that the first continuation request has `step` set to `1`, the second has `step` set to `0` and so on, and say that the Helper uses this field for step-skew recovery. In fact I don't think any of the paragraph needs to change as long as it's clear what the value of `step` is supposed to be. We might even stick this in the ladder diagram to make sure it's crystal clear.

> Of course, the DAP step is now redundant with the VDAF round, which as of the latest VDAF ping-pong iteration is tracked in the state. So, we could drop the DAP step & track retries with VDAF round. But I think this isn't a good idea for two reasons:

Totally agreed, let's not even bring up the VDAF round number in this section.
